# gittuf Versioning Policy

## Metadata

* **Number:** TBD
* **Title:** gittuf Versioning Policy
* **Implemented:** No
* **Withdrawn/Rejected:** No
* **Sponsors:** Aditya Sirish A Yelgundhalli (adityasaky)
* **Last Modified:** December 31, 2025

## Abstract

As gittuf is intended to be used in a distributed manner by developers
contributing to a repository, we need to have a plan in place for version skews.
It will inevitably be the case that different developers have different versions
of the client. Also, different versions of the client may support different
versions of gittuf's policy and attestation schemas. If not handled with care,
this can lead to unintended consequences, including degraded security
guarantees.

## Specification

Currently, gittuf versions the following pieces:
* attestation predicates: individual in-toto attestation predicates are
  versioned in the predicate type URI; this is inherited from the in-toto
  attestation specification
* gittuf implementation: the implementation itself is versioned and encompasses
  the behavior / workflows as well as the default versions of the metadata
  generated by the client at that version

The gittuf policy metadata's schema is not versioned, which will be amended as
part of this document. In summary, we intend to have the following gittuf
components versioned:
* attestation predicates
* gittuf policy metadata
* gittuf implementation

### Versioning Policy Metadata

All gittuf policy metadata schemas must henceforth have a `SchemaVersion` which
contains a URI indicating the schema version. For root metadata, this will be of
the form `https://gittuf.dev/policy/root/v<MAJOR>.<MINOR>.<PATCH>` and for rule
files, this will be of the form
`http://gittuf.dev/policy/rule-file/v<MAJOR>.<MINOR>.<PATCH>`. If the `PATCH` is
`0`, it is omitted. If the `MINOR` and `PATCH` are both `0`, they are omitted as
well.

The original gittuf policy metadata schema which is unversioned will be treated
as versions `https://gittuf.dev/policy/root/v0.1` and
`http://gittuf.dev/policy/rule-file/v0.1`.

While each policy metadata file will indicate its schema version, all gittuf
policy metadata in a policy state must have the same version to prevent
incompatibilities arising from mixing different versions of policy metadata. The
source of truth for the policy metadata versions is the version used for the
root metadata. This may be relaxed in a future update for patch version
differences.

#### Updating a Repository's Policy Metadata Version

When the root of trust key holders decide to upgrade the repository's policy
metadata to a newer major version, they must use a gittuf client that supports
the newer major version. The client must be used to update all policy metadata
files to the newer major version. To avoid requiring all policy metadata to be
re-signed by every required developer, the root key holders are trused to their
signature to all metadata.  Note that a threshold of root keys must be used to
sign all the updated policy metadata files, even if any of the files require
fewer signatures per the rules delegating to them.

#### Client Behavior

**Creating a new policy metadata file.** The client must create the new policy
metadata file with the version used for the latest root of trust metadata. If
the client supports newer versions of gittuf policy metadata (i.e., the
repository's metadata is of an older version), the client must print a warning
to the user indicating a newer version of gittuf policy metadata is available.
If the client does not support the policy metadata version used in the latest
root of trust metadata, the client must abort creating the new policy metadata
file.

**Loading policy metadata file.** The client presently verifies that the
metadata file is valid (i.e., signatures are valid, thresholds are met, etc.).
These checks are extended to include verifying that the policy metadata file's
version matches the version used in the latest root of trust metadata. If there
is a mismatch, the client must abort and indicate the version mismatch to the
user.

If the client supports newer versions of gittuf policy metadata than that used
in the latest root of trust, the client must print a warning to the user
indicating a newer version of gittuf policy metadata is available. If the client
does not support the policy metadata version used in the latest root of trust
metadata, the client must abort loading the policy metadata file and print a
warning to the user indicating the version mismatch. This is because the policy
metadata version may have specific security requirements that the client cannot
validate, degrading the security guarantees of gittuf.

**Modifying an existing policy metadata file.** As noted above, the client
verifies that the policy metadata file's version matches the version used in the
latest root of trust metadata when it loads the file. When there is no mismatch
and the client is able to load and validate the policy metadata file, the client
can proceed to modify the policy metadata file as directed by the user. When
writing the policy metadata file back to the repository, the client must ensure
that the same version is used as when it was loaded, even if the client supports
newer versions of the gittuf policy metadata.

Note that if the policy metadata file being modified is the root of trust
metadata itself, this does not apply. The root key holders may update the policy
version, meaning that the version will not match the version used in the latest
root of trust metadata. The client must allow this and update the versions of
all other policy metadata files in the repository to match the new version used
in the updated root of trust metadata.

**Signing an existing policy metadata file.** The client must verify that the
policy metadata file's version matches the version used in the latest root of
trust metadata when it loads the file. This is similar to the modification
workflow, meaning a client can be used to add a signature to an existing policy
metadata file as long as the client supports the version used in the latest root
of trust metadata. If the client does not support the policy metadata version
used, it must abort and print a warning to the user indicating the version
mismatch.

**Verifying gittuf policy.** The gittuf verification workflow also requires
loading policy metadata. So, the same version constraints apply. If the client
supports newer policy metadata versions than that used in the latest root of
trust, the client must print a warning to the user indicating a newer version of
gittuf policy metadata is available. Note that the client must not print
warnings for older policy metadata versions encountered in policy states prior
to the latest state. If the client does not support the version used in the
latest root of trust, then verification must be aborted as the client cannot
enforce policies it does not understand.  The client must continue enforcing
policies of older versions to ensure that a repository's historical changes
(which may have been protected by older versions) can continue being verified.

### Versioning Attestation Predicates

Attestation predicates are versioned via the predicate type URI as per the
in-toto attestation specification. The predicate type URI only indicates the
major version of the predicate for `v1` and above. Otherwise, the predicate type
URI indicates the major and minor version of the predicate.

#### Setting Predicate Versions for a Repository

The repository's root of trust metadata may indicate the minimum and maximum
versions supported for a predicate type. The minimum version prevents clients
from creating attestations with older versions of the predicate with reduced
security guarantees. The maximum version can be used to ensure compatibility
across clients used by developers contributing to the repository. Note that the
minimum version must be less than or equal to the maximum version.

#### Client Behavior

**Creating a new attestation.** The client must create the attestation using the
latest version of the predicate supported by the client that is within the
minimum and maximum versions specified in the repository's root of trust
metadata. If the root of trust only specifies a minimum version, the client must
use the latest version supported by the client as long as it is higher than the
specified minimum version. If the root of trust only specifies a maximum
version, the client must use either the latest version it supports or the
specified maximum version, whichever is lower. If the client does not support a
version that meets the repository's constraints, the client must abort creating
the attestation and print a warning to the user indicating the version mismatch.

```
selectedVersion = clientLatestVersion
if repoMinVersion is defined && selectedVersion < repoMinVersion:
    abort("Client does not support minimum predicate version")
if repoMaxVersion is defined && selectedVersion > repoMaxVersion:
    selectedVersion = repoMaxVersion
```

**Signing an existing attestation.** The client must only sign an existing
attestation when it supports the predicate version. If the client does not
support the predicate version (i.e., the client is outdated), it must abort and
print a warning to the user indicating the version mismatch. If the
attestation's predicate version does not meet the repository's minimum and
maximum version constraints, the client must also abort and print a warning to
the user indicating the version mismatch.

**Using attestations during verification.** The client must only use
attestations whose predicate versions meet the repository's minimum and maximum
version in the policy state applicable when the attestation was created. Any
attestations encountered that do not meet the version constraints must be
ignored.  Note that the client must continue supporting older predicate versions
to ensure gittuf verification can be used for historical repository activity.

### Versioning the gittuf Client

The gittuf implementation or client version conveys the behavior of gittuf
workflows it invokes. In that sense, this encompasses the version of the
predicate and policy metadata, as the client selects the version of metadata it
signs and consumes (subject to constraints indicated in the root of trust
metadata).

Significantly, the verification behavior of gittuf is only versioned via the
client's version, as this is not encoded as metadata itself. If the verification
behavior changes for existing policy and attestation predicate versions in a way
that a change that was previously allowed is now disallowed or vice versa, the
implementation's major version must be bumped. The gittuf client may check for
the existance of a newer version and inform the user. The client must not
attempt to update itself.

## Motivation

Different clients (on different versions) may default to different versions of a
predicate for the same context. For example, Alice may use an older version of
the reference authorization predicate to approve a change. Bob, who wants to
approve the same change, may have a newer version of the gittuf client which
uses a newer version of the predicate. Similarly, Alice may want to amend a
policy file that was last modified by Bob, and thus is of a newer version
unsupported by Alice's client. Handling these types of version mismatches is
imperative to ensure a developer using an older client does not cause
downgrade-style attacks, where the repository's metadata is rolled back to an
older version with fewer security guarantees.

## Reasoning

This GAP introduces ideas that balance security and usability.

### Aborting on Unsupported Versions

When a client encounters a newer version it does not support, this GAP requires
the client to abort the operation requested by the user. This is important
because while this may be inconvenient for the user, it prevents security
guarantees from being degraded. For example, if a client that does not support a
newer version of policy metadata is used for verification, not aborting means
that the client may allow changes that would have been prevented by a client
that understands the newer version of the policy metadata.

### Warnings for Older Versions

When a client encounters an older version of metadata than it supports, this GAP
requires the client to print a warning to the user indicating a newer version is
available. This is important to ensure users are aware of newer versions that
may have improved security guarantees. However, the client must not abort the
operation as this would lead to poor usability. For example, if a client
encounters an older version of policy metadata during verification, aborting
would prevent verification of historical repository activity.  Crucially, this
does not lead to degraded security guarantees as the client still understands
the older version.

## Backwards Compatibility

This GAP does not have impact on backwards compatibility of the existing gittuf
design and implementation. Indeed, the GAP introduces granular versioning of
metadata and behavior, which impacts how gittuf handles backwards compatibility
going forward.

## Security

The GAP considers how policy metadata, attestation predicates, and the
implementation itself are versioned. In addition, the GAP specifies how clients
must behave when they encounter version mismatches. The GAP empowers root of
trust key holders to make decisions regarding the versions of metadata used in
the repository, both for policy and specific attestation predicates. More
generally, the GAP prevents rollback attacks for gittuf metadata (unless
explicitly allowed by the root key holders). Finally, the GAP ensures that
clients operating on metadata fail in scenarios where the client does not
understand some metadata version, ensuring that security guarantees are not
degraded.

## Prototype Implementation

Some of the changes proposed in this GAP such as policy metadata versioning have
been added to the gittuf implementation.
